---
title: Globus Guide
description: Using Globus for fast file transfer
permalink: /guide/file-transfer/
author: VRSC
layout: page
# sidenav:  is a side navigation bar is needed it can be specified in the _data/navigation.yml file
---

#### Table of Contents
* [Login](#login)
* [Copying Data](#copying-data)
* [Globus Connect Personal](#globus-connect-personal)

# Login

* In a browser, navigate to https://www.globus.org/, click ‘Log In’ in the upper right corner.
* There are several ways to login to Globus Web App. Login using one of the available methods:
  1. Organizational login. Many organizations, mostly universities, have organizational logins. ARS currently does not provide organizational login. If your organization provides organizational login, select your organization from the list and login with your organization credentials at the familiar login page.
  2. Google account. Click on “Sign in with Google” at the bottom of the page if you want to use your google account.
  3. Globus ID. You can create an account on Globus ID and use it to log into Globus. See the link to Globus ID under the list of organizational logins.
* You should now be on the ‘File Manager’ page. Click on the "Transfer or Sync to..." link on the right. You should now see two panes.

# Copying Data
* The two panes represent the two system that you want to copy data between. You will need to select a Collection (an Endpoint) for each pane and most likely, authenticate.
* Click in the ‘Collection’ box on one of the unused panes. A selection window will appear. Recent collections will be listed under recent tab. Click on other tabs to see collections that you've bookmarked, created or got from other people. In the Recent tab you will also see "Install Globus Connect Personal" button. See below how to install Globus Connect Personal on your computer to transfer data to/from this computer.
* If you see your desired collection, click it and continue. If you do not see your desired collection start typing the name in the box at the top. When your collection appears, select it.
* If authentication is required for the selected collection, required fields or other instructions will appear.
* Type or select “Ceres DTN 1” You will be prompted to login.
* Username is your Ceres username. Your password is your Ceres password PLUS the **six digits** generated by Google Authenticator for access to the Ceres cluster. You would use ‘Password123456’ for the password field where ‘123456’ would be the current code from Google Authenticator and ‘Password’ would be your normal SCINet password.
* Once you have logged in on both panes you will need to navigate to the data you want to copy in one pane (source pane) and navigate to the location you want it copied to on the other pane (destination pane). You can either click on directory names or type the full path in the Path box (under the Collection box).
* Before you start your copy, look at the Transfer & Sync Options at the bottom of the page (click on arrow to see available options). To see a short description of each option click on "i" next to the option.
* To start the transfer click the blue box with the arrow at the bottom of the page pointing in the direction of the destination pane.
* You may now click ‘Activity’ at the left to see a list of current and prior transfers. Click on "File Manager" at the top left of the page to get back to the main page.

# Globus Connect Personal

To transfer files to your personal computer you may use Globus Connect Personal. A link “Get Globus Personal Connect” can be found in the Recent tab and in the "More Options" tab in the list of Collections. Click on "Collection" box to get to the list.  The install instructions are available at https://docs.globus.org/how-to/globus-connect-personal-windows/ .

By default, Globus Connect Personal prompts to be installed in C:\Program Files , which requires administrator rights. However you don't need Administrator rights to install Globus Connect Personal on your local machine. If you do not have Administrator rights browse to a place you have write access to (e.g. your Desktop folder) or contact your local IT staff for assistance.
